>> Woodruff: POLITICAL TURMOIL
IN BAGHDAD.
IRAQ'S PRESIDENT NAMES A NEW
PRIME MINISTER BUT NOURI AL-
MALIKI REFUSES TO GIVE UP HIS
POST.
AS THE FIGHT AGAINST ISLAMIC
MILITANTS CONTINUES IN THE
NORTH.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY, THE
KILLING OF AN UNARMED BLACK
TEENAGER BY POLICE TRIGGERS
OUTRAGE, VIOLENCE AND VANDALISM
OUTSIDE ST. LOUIS.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, THE PRESIDENT
OF SOMALIA DISCUSSES RISING
VIOLENCE BY ISLAMIC MILITANTS IN
AFRICA AND HIS PUSH TO RETAKE
REGIONS WHERE THE AL-QAIDA-
LINKED AL-SHABAAB OPERATES.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: A NEW POLITICAL STORM
IS BREAKING IN BAGHDAD.
EFFORTS TO FORM A GOVERNMENT RAN
INTO STRONG OPPOSITION TODAY
FROM THE SITTING PRIME MINISTER
AND THAT IN TURN, PROMPTED NEW
WARNINGS FROM WASHINGTON.
IT ALL FOLLOWED AN ANNOUNCEMENT
THAT RAISED HOPES FOR CHANGE.
AFTER MONTHS OF POLITICAL
DEADLOCK IN IRAQ, A POTENTIAL
BREAKTHROUGH TODAY.
THE NEW PRESIDENT FOUAD MASSOUM,
A KURD, TAPPED DEPUTY PARLIAMENT
SPEAKER HAIDER AL-ABADI, A
SHIITE, TO FORM A GOVERNMENT AND
BECOME PRIME MINISTER.
ABADI, WHO BELONGS TO THE SAME
PARTY AS CURRENT PRIME MINISTER
NOURI AL-MALIKI, QUICKLY CALLED
FOR UNITY AGAINST A SUNNI
INSURGENCY LED BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP.
>> ( translated ): I HAVE
CONFIDENCE THAT, WITH THE PEOPLE
AND POLITICAL BLOCS, WE WOULD BE
ABLE TO OVERCOME THIS BARBARIC
AND SAVAGE ATTACK ON THE IRAQI
PEOPLE AND PROVIDE A GOOD
ENVIRONMENT FOR THE IRAQI PEOPLE
TO LIVE IN.
>> Ifill: BUT AL-MALIKI HAS
SPURNED CALLS FROM THE U.S. AND
OTHER SHIITES TO STEP ASIDE IN
FAVOR OF A LESS-POLARIZING
FIGURE.
TODAY, HE DEPLOYED LOYAL
SECURITY FORCES ACROSS BAGHDAD.
AND HE INSISTED HE IS THE ONLY
LEGAL CHOICE FOR PRIME MINISTER
BECAUSE HIS BLOC WON A PLURALITY
IN THE APRIL ELECTION.
>> ( translated ): WE ASSURE
IRAQI PEOPLE AND POLITICAL
GROUPS THIS IS AGIANST THE
CONSTITUTION.
>> Ifill: VICE PRESIDENT JOE
BIDEN MADE CLEAR WHERE U.S.
SENTIMENTS LIE, CONGRATULATING
ABADI IN A PHONE CALL, AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA TOOK A BREAK
FROM HIS VACATION TO ADD HIS
SUPPORT AS WELL.
>> Ifill: THE POLITICAL TURMOIL
CAME AMID A NEW AMERICAN EFFORT
TO STEM THE ISLAMIC STATE'S
SURGE IN NORTHERN IRAQ.
SENIOR U.S. OFFICIALS SAID TODAY
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IN
CONCERT WITH THE CENTRAL BAGHDAD
GOVERNMENT IS NOW DIRECTLY
PROVIDING WEAPONS TO KURDISH
PESHMERGA FORCES.
WHET IRBIL
ON SUNDAY.
MEANWHILE, U.S. AIR STRIKES
CONTINUED THROUGH THE WEEKEND.
SPEAKING AT THE PENTAGON TODAY,
LT. GEN. WILLIAM MAYVILLE
CAUTIONED THE CAMPAIGN, SO FAR,
IS LIMITED.
>> I THINK IN THE IMMEDIATE
AREAS WHERE WE HAVE FOCUSED OUR
STRENGTHS WE'VE HAD A VERY
TEMPORARY EFFECT AND WE MAY HAVE
I, IN NO WAY WANT TO SUGGEST
THAT WE HAVE EFFECTIVELY
CONTAINED OR THAT WE ARE SOMEHOW
BREAKING THE MOMENTUM OF THE
THREAT POSED BY ISIL.
>> Ifill: THE ADMINISTRATION
ALSO ANNOUNCED IT'S SENDING A
DISASTER RESPONSE TEAM TO IRAQ
TO DISTRIBUTE HUMANITARIAN AID.
MUCH OF IT WILL GO TO THOUSANDS
OF YAZIDIS WHO'VE FLED TO THE
TOP OF SINJAR MOUNTAIN TO ESCAPE
THE MILITANTS.
ALREADY, THE U.S. AND BRITAIN
HAVE AIR-DROPPED THOUSANDS OF
GALLONS OF WATER AND HUNDREDS OF
MEALS TO THE REFUGEES.
WE'LL GET THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S
PERSPECTIVE ON ALL OF THIS,
RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Woodruff: ISRAELI AND
PALESTINIAN NEGOTIATORS RESUMED
INDIRECT TALKS IN EGYPT TODAY,
AS A NEW 72-HOUR CEASE-FIRE
BEGAN.
AT THE SAME TIME, ISRAEL CALLED
FOR AN INTERNATIONAL EFFORT TO
PROVIDE RELIEF TO GAZA.
IT WOULD BE CONDITIONED ON THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY RESUMING
CONTROL OF GAZA SOMETHING HAMAS
IS LIKELY TO REJECT.
>> Ifill: TURKEY'S PRESIDENT-
ELECT RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN BEGAN
WORKING TODAY ON THE NEXT PHASE
OF CONSOLIDATING POWER.
ON SUNDAY, THE THREE-TERM PRIME
MINISTER WON TURKEY'S FIRST
DIRECT PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
NOW, HE NEEDS A STRONGER
MAJORITY IN PARLIAMENT TO
CONVERT THE PRESIDENCY FROM
CEREMONIAL POST.
LAST NIGHT, IN A VICTORY SPEECH,
ERDOGAN STRUCK A CONCILIATORY
TONE TOWARD HIS CRITICS.
>> ( translated ): BROTHERS, I
SAY THIS FROM THE HEART.
LET'S START A NEW SOCIAL
RECONCILIATION PERIOD TODAY AND
LET'S LEAVE THE OLD DISCUSSIONS
IN THE OLD TURKEY.
LET'S LEAVE TENSIONS, CULTURE OF
CLASHES AND VIRTUAL PROBLEMS IN
OLD TURKEY.
>> Ifill: ERDOGAN'S CRITICS HAVE
CHARGED HE'S BECOME INCREASINGLY
AUTOCRATIC AND TRANSFORMED
TURKEY FROM A SECULAR STATE TO
AN INCREASINGLY RELIGIOUS STATE.
>> Woodruff: THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED TODAY IT'S
SENDING A HUMANITARIAN AID
CONVOY INTO UKRAINE.
THE CONVOY WOULD TRAVEL IN
COOPERATION WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS.
UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO ANNOUNCED HE'S AGREED
TO THE PLAN, AFTER SPEAKING WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
MEANWHILE, NATO SECRETARY
GENERAL ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN
WARNED THERE'S A HIGH
PROBABILITY THAT THE RUSSIANS
ACTUALLY PLAN MILITARY ACTION.
>> WE SEE THE RUSSIANS
DEVELOPING THE NARRATIVE AND
PRETEXT FOR SUCH AN OPERATION
UNDER THE GUISE OF A
HUMANITARIAN OPERATION AND WE
SEE A MILITARY BUILDUP THAT
COULD BE USED TO CONDUCT SUCH
ILLEGAL MILITARY OPERATIONS IN
UKRAINE.
>> Woodruff:AILS
CLAIMED RUSSIA HAS AMASSED EVEN
MORE TROOPS ON THE BORDER SOME
45,000.
MEANWHILE, ROCKETS SLAMMED INTO
A HIGH-SECURITY PRISON IN THE
REBEL-HELD CITY OF DONETSK,
LETTING MORE THAN 100 PRISONERS
ESCAPE.
AT THE SAME TIME, UKRAINE'S
MILITARY DECLARED IT'S IN THE
FINAL STAGES OF RETAKING THE
CITY.
>> Ifill: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
IS CHARGING THE U.S. MILITARY
HAS NOT PURSUED TROOPS WHO
TORTURED OR KILLED CIVILIANS IN
AFGHANISTAN.
>> IN NUMEROUS CASES IN WHICH
THERE IS CREDIBLE EVIDENCE OF
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS OF CIVILIANS,
THE MILITARY HAS FAILED TO
CONDUCT PROMPT, THOROUGH AND
IMPARTIAL INVESTIGATIONS.
THE PENTAGON DENIED IGNORING
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
>> Woodruff: NIGERIA NOW HAS TEN
CONFIRMED CASES OF EBOLA.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT TODAY SAID TWO
PATIENTS HAVE DIED.
ALL HAD BEEN IN CONTACT WITH A
LIBERIAN WHO BROUGHT THE VIRUS
IN ON A PLANE IN LATE JULY.
MEANWHILE, IN CHARLOTTE, NORTH
CAROLINA, THREE MISSIONARIES
HAVE RETURNED FROM WEST AFRICA
AFTER WORKING WITH EBOLA
PATIENTS.
THEY'RE HEALTHY, BUT WILL STAY
QUARANTINED FOR AT LEAST THREE
WEEKS AS A PRECAUTION.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET TODAY,
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 16 POINTS TO CLOSE JUST
SHORT OF 16,570; THE NASDAQ ROSE
30 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,401; AND
THE S&P 500 ADDED 5, TO FINISH
NEAR 1,937.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
POLITICAL TURMOIL ROILS BAGHDAD
AFTER IRAQ'S PRESIDENT NAMES A
NEW PRIME MINISTER.
THE PRESIDENT OF SOMALIA ON
DEMOCRACY-BUILDING, AL-SHABAAB,
AND MORE.
PLUS, RACIAL UNREST AFTER POLICE
KILL AN UNARMED TEEN IN
MISSOURI.
AND, WHY MORE MEDIA COMPANIES
ARE DITCHING THEIR NEWSPAPER
OPERATIONS.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN NOW TO THE
SITUATION IN IRAQ.
BRETT MCGURK IS THE DEPUTY
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS WHERE HE
FOCUSES ON IRAQ.
THAR FOR JOINING US,
MR. DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY.
WHAT ROLE DID THE UNITED
STATES HAVE ENFORCING MALIKI'S
HANDS?
THERE ARE REPORTS THAT YOU
PERSONALLY MAY HAVE HAD A
ROLE IN THAT?
>> I CAN ASSURE YOU, GWEN,
THAT THOSE REPORTS ARE NOT
TRUE.
IN 2010 I THINK WE WERE, IT
WAS SAID THAT WE SOMEHOW
MANEUVERED MALIKI INTO
POWER.
NOW IT'S SAID WE'RE SOMEHOW
MANEUVERING HIM OUT OF
POWER.
THE POLITICAL DYNAMICS IN
IRAQ HAVE REALLY THEIR OWN
DYNAMIC WHICH THE IRAQIS
SORT THROUGH VERY MUCH ON
THEIR OWN.
WE DO PLAY A VERY ACTIVE
FACILITATING ROLE BETWEEN
ALL THE POLITICAL BLOCS.
WE ENCOURAGE THEM AS DOES
THE UNITED NATIONS AND OTHER
PARTNERS IN BAGHDAD TO TRY
TO KEEP TO THE
CONSTITUTIONAL TIME LINE,
KEEP THINGS MOVING FORWARD.
BECAUSE THIS IS AN
EXTRAORDERLY COMPLEX AND
DIFFICULT SITUATION,
PARTICULARLY ON THE SECURITY
SIDE BUT ALSO ON THE
POLITICAL SIDE.
IT'S VERY COMPLICATED AND WE
SERVE AS NEUTRAL BROKERS
WHEN USEFUL.
WHEN WE CAN PROVIDE AN IDEA
TO BRIDGE TWO DIFFERENT
IDEAS AND PROPOSALS WE
CERTAINLY DO THAT.
BUT IT'S NOT OUR JOB TO PICK
WHO SHOULD BE IN POWER OR
WHO SHOULD NOT BE IN NO WE
ARE.
>> Ifill: IN YOUR ROLE AS A
NEUTRAL BROKERS ARE
PERSUADED THAT MR. ABADI IS
GOING TO BE WHAT THE U.S. OR
ANY OTHER PERSON IN THE
REGION, ANY OTHER COUNTRY IN
THE REGION NEEDS NOW FOR
IRAQ TO GET BACK ON ITS
FEET?
>> WELL, HE'S SOMEONE WE'VE
KNOWN FOR SOME TIME.
WE'VE KNOWN ALL THESE
LEADERS FOR SOME TIME.
WE HAVE HAVE DEEP
RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE HOST
OF IRAQI LEADERS ON ALL
SIDES.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
FOCUS ON WHERE WE ARE IN
THIS PROCESS.
THE FIRST AS THE PRESIDENT
JUST SAID IN HIS STATEMENT,
THE FIRST STEP WAS TO CHOOSE
A SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT
AND THAT HAPPENED ABOUT A
MONTH AGO.
AND THAT SET A 15 DAYTIME
LINE FOR NAMING THE
PRESIDENT OF THE STATE.
AND THAT TOOK PLACE ON TIME.
AND THAT SET A NEW TIME LINE
FOR NAMING THE PRIME
MINISTER.
AND THAT HAPPENED TODAY.
THE PRIME MINISTER DESIGNATE
ABADI NOW HAS 30 DAYS TO
PRESENT A NEW CABINET AND
PRESENT A NATIONAL PARTICLE
TO THE-- PROGRAM TO THE
PARLIAMENT AND THE
PARLIAMENT HAS TO RATIFY
THAT PROGRAM AND IF THEY DO
ABADI WILL LEAD A FULL
FOUR-YEAR TERM GOVERNMENT.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS TODAY IS
ABADI WAS NAMED THE
PRESIDENT DESIGNATEMENT WE
HAVE OBVIOUSLY EMBRACED THAT
DECISION BECAUSE IT IS A
TI
PROCESS OF FORMING A NEW
GOVERNMENT AND THE IRAQIS
HAVE BEEN WORKING HARD AT
THIS AND NOW THE NEXT STEP,
OVER THE COMING DAY, HE WILL
BEGIN THE PROCESS OF PULLING
TOGETHER COALITION PARTNERS
AND FORMING A NEW
GOVERNMENT.
WE WANT THAT GOVERNMENT TO
BE BROAD-BASED INCLUSIVE,
AND TO DEVELOP A NATIONAL
PROGRAM THAT CAN HARNESS THE
RESOURCES OF THE STATE TO
PULL THE COUNTRY TOGETHER
OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS.
IF THEY DO SO, WE'LL BE A
VERY WILLING PARTNER.
>> Ifill: THAT'S THE
POLITICAL PART OF THIS
EQUATION.
THERE IS ALSO A MILITARY
PART.
WE HAVE HEARD OF NEW AIR
STRIKES TODAY.
THE KURDS ARE HOPING THAT
YOU EXPAND THOSE AIR STRIKES.
CAN YOU IMAGINE THAT BEING
ABLE TO HAPPEN?
THAT IS, THE U.S. STEPPING
UP ITS MILITARY ACTION IN
THE-- IN IRAQ IF MALIKI WERE
TO CONTINUE WHAT HE'S DOING
NOW, WHICH IS TRYING TO HOLD
ON TO POWER.
CAN YOU IMAGINE DOING THIS
WITH HIM THERE?
>> WELL, GWEN, ON THE
SECURITY SIDE WE'RE FOCUSED
ON U.S. ACTION WE ARE TWO
MISSIONS, ONE IS AROUND
SINJAR MOUNTAIN TO BREAK THE
SIEGE AND THAT IS WHY WE ARE
DOING AIR STRIKES THERE OVER
THE LAST FOUR OR FIVE DAYS
INCLUDING ANOTHER SERIES OF
AIR STRIKES CONDUCTED TODAY
FROM ISIS LOCATIONS NEAR THE
MOUNTAIN WHO ARE THREATENING
THE CIVILIAN POPULATION THAT
IS UNDER SIEGE ON THAT
MOUNTAIN.
AND SECONDLY WE'RE COMMITTED
TO PROTECTING THE REGIONAL
CAPITOL OF IRBIL.
AND WE HAVE DONE A NUMBER OF
AIR STRIKES TO MAKE SURE
ISIS FORCES CANNOT ENCROACH
ON IRBIL.
AND THOSE STRIKES HAVE ALSO
BEEN QUITE SUCCESSFUL.
SOUTH OF THE KURDISHSTAN
REGION WE ARE FOCUSED WITH
THE IRAQIS, WE HAVE A JOINT
OPERATION CENTER IN BAGHDAD
WHICH WE SED UP IN JUNE, AND
WE ARE WORKING HARD
COORDINATING HOW THEY MIGHT
PUSH BACK AGAINST ISIS,
WORKING WITH THEIR IRAQI AIR
FORCE IN TERMS OF HOW THEY
CAN DO TARGETING.
>> Ifill: BUT IF I COULD
INTERRUPT YOU FOR A MOMENT.
I GUESS MY QUESTION IS
WHETHER ALL THAT WOULD STILL
GO ON IF MALIKI STAYS IN
POWER?
>> WELL, GWEN, I DON'T WANT
TO GET AHEAD OF THE PROCESS.
WE JUST HAD A NEWS PREMIER
DESIGNATE.
HE HAS 30 DAYS TO FORM A NEW
GOVERNMENT.
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE.
THE PRIME MINISTER MALIKI IS
STILL THE PRIME MINISTER OF
THE STATE AND WE'RE GOING
CONTINUE WORKING CLOSELY
WITH HIM OVER THE NEXT 30
DAYS, OBVIOUSLY.
AND WE'LL BE WORKING WITH
ALL THE LEADERS TO PULL
TOGETHER A NEW GOVERNMENT.
SO THERE IS MULTIPLE STRANDS
HERE THAT WE HAVE TO DO-- WE
HAVE TO KIND OF PULL ALL IN
AT ONCE.
IT'S A VERY COMPLICATED
SITUATION, OBVIOUSLY.
BUT WE'RE FOCUSED ON THE
ISIS THREAT FROM NORTH TO
SOUTH.
WE ARE PARTICULARLY FOCUSED
ON BAGHDAD, ON ANBAR PRO
SINCE.
AND IN EACH FRONT THERE ARE
DIFFERENT DYNAMICS AND
ELEMENTS.
BUT WE'RE NOT GOING TO SLOW
DOWN ANY OF OUR SUPPORT.
BUT THE PRESIDENT HAS SAID
AND REPEATED AGAIN TONIGHT,
IN THE CONTEXT OF A NEW AND
INCLUSIVE GOVERNMENT, WE
WILL BE IN A VERY ACTIVE
CONVERSATION WITH THE
LEADERSHIP ABOUT WHAT THEY
NEED AND WE WILL BE PREPARED
TO COME BEHIND THEM IF THEY
HAVE A PLAN TO PULL THE
COUNTRY TOGETHER AND UNITE
THE COUNTRY AGAINST THIS
VERY SERIOUS THREAT.
>> Ifill: DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR NEAR
EASTERN AFFAIRS BRETT
McGURK-- BRETT McGURK, THANK
YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE, WE TURN NOW
TO ZALMAY KHALILZAD.
HE WAS U.S. AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ
DURING THE GEORGE W. BUSH
ADMINISTRATION.
HE NOW HAS HIS OWN CONSULTING
FIRM.
AND LAITH KUBBA IS SENIOR
DIRECTOR FOR THE MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA AT THE NATIONAL
ENDOT FOR DEMOCRACY.
WHAT CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT
AL-ABADI.
>> I KNOW MR. AL ABADI.
HE WAS A MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT WHEN I WAS IN
BAGHDAD.
HE HAS VERY DISTINGUISHED
BACKGROUND.
HE WAS FROM BAGHDADI FAMILY,
A VERY WELL-KNOWN FAMILY.
HE'S A MEMBER OF THE PARTY
THAT MR. MALIKI ALSOES WITH
A MEMBER OF.
HE SPENT A LOT OF TIME IN
THE UNITED KINGDOM, GOT A
Ph.D THERE.
SO HE KNOWS THE WEST AND
MAYBE MORE OPEN TO
ALTERNATIVE IDEAS.
HE'S GOT A BIG AND DIFFICULT
TASK AHEAD, NOT ONLY DEALING
WITH THE CHALLENGE OF
MR. MALIKI, BUT ALSO TO
BRING IRAQIS, SHI'A, SUNNI,
KURDS TOGETHER, FORM A
GOVERNMENT.
AND IT'S VERY DIFFICULT AND
CHALLENGING TIME.
>> Ifill: LAITH KUBBA, WHAT
CAN HE ACCOMPLISH THAT NOURI
AL-MALIKI COULD NOT OR
CANNOT?
>> WELL, NUMBER ONE, HE IS
LESS THREATENING NOW TO ALL
OTHER POLITICAL BLOCS.
THEY SEE HIM AS LESS
THREATENING.
>> Ifill: EVEN THOUGH HE'S
FROM THE SAME PARTY.
>> HE'S FROM THE SAME PARTY
BUT THE PARTY HAS BEENNOW A LIT.
AND MALIKI HAS DISOWNED HIM,
IN A WAY.
SO THAT MIGHT PLAY TO HIS
ADVANTAGE.
HE HAS A WEAKER HAND.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, I
THINK HE IS GOING TO-- HE'S
IN A BETTER POSITION TO
NEGOTIATE WITH OTHERS.
>> Ifill: AS WE JUST HEARD
AT THE STATE DEPARTMENT, AT
LEAST FOR THE NEXT 30 DAYS
TECHNICALLY MALIKI IS TO THE
GOING ANYWHERE.
HE SAYS THAT THIS IS ALL
LEGALLY WORTHLESS.
THAT HE IS STILL IN POWER.
CAN THIS MOVE FORWARD AS
LONG AS HE CONTINUES TO HOLD
ON?
>> I THINK THERE IS A
POTENTIAL FOR SERIOUS
PROBLEMS.
BUT THE MORE LIKELY SCENARIO
IN MY VIEW IS THAT DURING
THE 30 DAYS, SOME SORT OF A
DEAL WILL BE WORKED OUT
WHERE SOME OF THE CONCERNS
THAT MR. MALIKI MAY HAVE
ABOUT HIS OWN FUTURE MIGHT
BE ADDRESSED WHETHER IT HAS
TO DO WITH A POSSIBLE
POSITION.
WHETHER IT HAS TO DO WITH
SOME FORM OF IMMUNITY,
PROTECTION.
I WOULD-- I THINK WHILE THE
RISKS OF CONFRONTATION AND
PERHAPS THE USE OF THE
MILITARY ARE AND SECURITY
FORCES IS THERE AND I THINK
THE PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE
TODAY WAS LOUD AND CLEAR IN
SUPPORT OF MR. AL-ABADI
WITHOUT MENTIONING MALIKI,
BUT THE MESSAGE ACTUALLY
WERE FOR MR. MALIKI.
AND I SUSPECT THAT A LOT OF
MANEUVERING GOING ON IN
BAGHDAD AND WILL INTENSIFY
TO WORK OUT SOMETHING
BETWEEN THE TWO.
>> Ifill: DO AGREE THAT THIS
IS JUST A DEAL WAITING TO BE
CUT?
>> I'M A BIT CAUTIOUS.
I THINK MALIKI SURPRISED
EVERYBODY IN THE WAY HE'S
BEEN INDIFFERENT TO THE
WHOLE WORLD AROUND HIM.
AND SO FIXATED ON POWER.
I THINK THE FACT THAT THE
COUNTRY IS FALLING APART,
TERRITORY UNDER ISIS,
BAGHDAD ITSELF IS UNDER
THREAT YET MALIKI IS NOT
THINKING OF THE COUNTRY.
AND HE'S NOT THINKING THAT
THE WHOLE WORLD HAS ENDORSED
MR. ABADI, AND THAT ALL
POLITICAL BLOCS WANT TO WORK
WITH HIM.
HE'S INDIFFERENT TO ALL THAT
AND INSISTING TO PLAY HARD
POLITICS.
TO ME THAT IS WORRYING.
HE HAS ENCOURAGED SOME
MILITIAS TO GO OUT IN THE
STREETS.
WITH THAT MIND-SET I THINK
EVERYBODY IS TAKEN BY
SURPRISE AND WORRY, WOULD HE
ASSUME FOR A MOMENT
THAT A DEAL CAN BE CUT,
SOMETHING CAN BE AGREED ON.
IF NOT IN THE NEAR FUTURE
THAN IN THE EVENTUAL FUTURE.
AND MR. ABADI TAKES OVER.
WHAT CAN HE DO TO FORM A
WORKABLE GOVERNMENT IN A
COUNTRIES THAT'S FALLING
APART, MR. AMBASSADOR?
>> WELL, HE WILL HAVE TO
COME TO AN AGREEMENT WITH
THE KURDS, WHICH WILL BE
TOUGH FOR HIM BECAUSE THE
KURDS ARE DEMANDING EVEN
MORE AUTONOMY THAN THEY HAVE,
IN THEIR CURRENT
CIRCUMSTANCES.
THEY WANT ESSENTIALLY TO
REPLACE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
TO A ESSENTIALLY TO BE
SOVEREIGN.
BUT IN SOME FORMER
ASSOCIATION WITH BAGHDAD SO
THAT THEY CAN CONTROL THEIR
OWN OIL EXPORTS, THEY CAN
GET WEAPONS FOR THEIR OWN
FORCES.
THEY CAN CONTROL THEIR OWN
AIRSPACE.
SO IT'S A TOUGH ONE TO DO
WITHOUT LOSING GROUND
INTERNALLY FOR HIM.
AND WITH THE SUNNIS,
SIMILARLY, HE WILL HAVE TO
AGREE TO A DEVOLUTION OF
AUTHORITY AWAY FROM THE
CENTER TO THE PROVINCES.
THE SUNNIS WANT A REGION
LIKE KURDISTAN OF THEIR OWN
OR SEVERAL REGIONS, AGAIN TO
HAVE THEIR OWN FORCES FOR
LOCAL SECURITY AND TO BRING
THEM, ITS SUNNIS AND KURDS
TOGETHER WITH THEM, GIVEN
THE DEMANDS, IT IS GOING TO
BE A TALL ORDER, A DIFFICULT
CHALLENGE FOR HIM, AND THEN
TO MOBILIZE EVERYBODY
AGAINST ISIS WHICH IS
KNOCKING AT THE DOOR.
HE'S GOING TO HAVE ONE OF
THE WORLD'S TOUGHEST JOBS.
>> Ifill: IT SOUNDS LIKE IT,
HOW DO YOU SEE IT WORK LAITH
KUBBA.
>> IT IS A TALL ORDER AND
IT'S VERY TOUGH.
I THINK IN ADDITION TO
TRYING TO CONTAIN THE DEMAND,
THE INCREASING DEMANDS, I
THINK HE NEEDS TO REACH OUT
TO IRAQ'S NEIGHBORS.
I THINK MALIKI HAS SPOILED
EL
IRAQ'S NEIGHBORS.
AND HE NEEDS TO REACH TO ALL
OF THEM TO SAY A NEW
BEGINNING.
HE NEEDS THEIR HELP, NOT
ONLY IN CONTAINING ISIS, BUT
ALSO IN BUILDING A NEW
MOMENTUM IN THE COUNTRY.
I THINK THE ENDORSEMENT HE
HAS WOULD GIVE HIM A GOOD
START.
HE ALSO NEEDS TO FORM A
CABINET THAT WOULD FUNCTION
AND DELIVER SOME SERVICES TO
THE COUNTRY.
NOT SIMPLY TO APPEASE
POLITICAL BLOCS.
I TH IRAQIS WANT TOSEE
SOME DIFFERENT OUT OF THEIR
ELECTORAL PROCESSES.
THEY VOTE EVERY TIME AND THE
SYSTEM IS NOT GETTING ANY
BETTER.
AND THE SECURITY FRONT, IT'S
MOST CHALLENGING.
I THINK THAT ONE IS A
HEAD-ON.
HE NEEDS TO WORK WITH THE
ARMY, WITH NEARLY EVERYBODY
IN ORDER TO INSURANCE
SECURITY IS DELIVERED AND
IRAQ GIVES BACK SOME ORDER.
>> ONE FERTED THINGS WE'VE
BEEN HEARING IS THAT THE
U.S. IN COLLABORATION WITH
BAGHDAD GOVERNMENT, WHO EVER
THAT IS THESE DAYS HAVE
AGREED TO ARM THE KURDS.
IS THAT HELPFUL IS THIS OR
IS THAT ALSO A POTENTIAL
WEDGE?
>> I THINK THAT'S HELPFUL
BECAUSE IT CAME IN THE
CONTEXT OF A VERY URGENT
SITUATION WITH THE MOVE OF
ISIS INTO KURDISTAN COMING
VERY CLOSE TO IRBIL AND VERY
DEVASTATING ACTION AGAINST
YAZIDIS AND CHRISTIANS AND
OTHERS.
SO THIS WAS BASED ON AN
AGREEMENT WITH BAGHDAD.
ALTHOUGH I THINK WE ALSO ARE
STARTING OUT A BILATERAL
AGREEMENT WITH THE KURDS.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK LAITH
KUBBA BRIEFLY.
>> THE CON FIX AS SAID
EARLIER, THE KURDS ARE
PUSHING FOR A FEDERAL STATE
T BECOMES A HIGHLY CHARGED
ISSUE.
BECAUSE IF THEY HAVE THE
WEAPONS, THEN THAT WOULD
CREATE A DE FACTO STATE.
AND WILL COMPLICATE THINGS.
I THINK THE ONLY WAY TO
CONTAIN THE KURDISH ISSUE IS
THROUGH NEGOTIATIONS, NOT
THROUGH ENTRENCHED ARMED
POSITIONS.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE WATCHING
FOR ALL OF THAT LAITH KUBBA
AND ZAL NAY KHALILZAD, THANK
YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT, WE TAKE A
LOOK AT THE EAST AFRICAN NATION
OF SOMALIA.
THE COUNTRY HAS BEEN PLAGUED BY
WAR, CORRUPTION, AND TERRORISM
BUT ITS LEADER SAYS HE WANTS TO
CHANGE ITS COURSE.
IN SEPTEMBER 2012, HASSAN SHEIKH
MOHAMUD WAS SWORN IN AS
SOMALIA'S NEW PRESIDENT IN A BID
TO END DECADES OF CHAOS,
VIOLENCE AND POVERTY.
AFTER YEARS WITHOUT A CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT, A NEW PARLIAMENT
ELECTED THE COMMUNITY ACTIVIST
AND ACADEMIC.
>> ( translated ): I
CONGRATULATE ALL THE SOMALI
PEOPLE WHEREVER THEY ARE AND I
CAN SAY THAT WE HAVE NOW COME
BACK FROM THE LONG DAYS OF
SUFFERING AND OUR FEET ARE
HEADED IN THE RIGHT PATH.
>> Woodruff: SOMALIA HAD
SUFFERED LONG YEARS OF FIGHTING.
SEEN A FAILED U.N. AND U.S.
MISSION IN THE EARLY '90'S THE
DAYS OF "BLACK HAWK DOWN," THEN,
RAMPANT PIRACY AND THE RISE OF
AL-SHABAAB MILITANTS.
BUT WITHIN MONTHS OF MOHAMUD'S
GOVERNMENT TAKING POWER,
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON ANNOUNCED THE U.S. WOULD
RECOGNIZE SOMALIA FOR THE FIRST
TIME SINCE 1991.
>> WE HAVE MOVED INTO AN ERA
WHERE WE'RE GOING TO BE A GOOD
PARTNER, A STEADFAST PARTNER, TO
SOMALIA AS SOMALIA MAKES THE
DECISIONS FOR ITS OWN FUTURE.
>> Woodruff: TODAY, SECURITY
STILL LOOMS LARGE OVER THAT
FUTURE.
SOLDIERS FROM THE AFRICAN UNION
MISSION IN SOMALIA, OR AMISOM,
PATROL MUCH THE COUNTRY.
AND THE U.S. MILITARY HAS BEEN
TRAINING TROOPS TO HELP FIGHT
AL-SHABAAB.
THE MILITANTS NO LONGER CONTROL
THE CAPITAL, MOGADISHU, AND
OTHER CITIES, BUT THEY'VE
STEPPED UP ATTACKS.
INCLUDING A RECENT ASSAULT ON
THE PARLIAMENT BUILDING.
LAST WEEK, AT THE U.S. AFRICA
LEADERS SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT MOHAMUD BLAMED THE
MILITANTS FOR HOLDING BACK
SOMALIA.
IN TURN, OPPONENTS ACCUSE
MOHAMUD OF CORRUPTION.
THIS WEEKEND, THE PRESIDENT DREW
PROTESTERS AS WELL AS GREETERS
IN MINNESOTA, WHERE HE TRAVELED
TO MEET MEMBERS OF THE LARGEST
SOMALI POPULATION IN THE UNITED
STATES.
I SAT DOWN WITH HIM ON FRIDAY
AHEAD OF THAT TRIP.
PRESIDENT MOHAMUD THANK YOU FOR
TALKING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU JUDY.
>> Woodruff: SO, AS YOU PREPARE
TO LEAVE WASHINGTON, HAVE YOU
FOUND THIS WEEK'S MEETINGS TO BE
HELPFUL, USEFUL TO YOU?
>> IT WAS VERY USEFUL.
THE MEETING WAS MEANT FOR THE
AFRICAN CONTINENT OF COURSE AND
WE LEARNED A LOT AND THERE WAS
NEW INJECTIONS FROM THE UNITED
STATE GOVERNMENT TO PUSH THE
ECONOMY AND THE LIFE OF THE
PEOPLE OF AFRICA.
WE ARE VERY MUCH GRATEFUL FOR
THE LEVEL OF SUPPORT THAT HAS
BEEN SHOWED TO US AND WE ALREADY
HAVE MOVED AND PROGRESSED IN OUR
COOPERATION BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES GOVERNMENT AND SOMALIA.
>> Woodruff: HOW MUCH AID WOULD
YOU SAY THE UNITED STATES IS
GIVING TO SOMALIA AND HOW WOULDx
YOU DESCRIBE THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES?
>> IT'S ONLY LAST YEAR WHEN THE
TRANSITION WAS ENDED IN SOMALIA
AND THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
RECOGNIZED SOMALI GOVERNMENT AS
A LEGITIMATE STATE TO DEATH.
AND THEN WE STARTED OUR
COOPERATION, WE SIGNED A NUMBER
OF COOPERATION AGREEMENTS AND
STILL WE ARE AT THE BEGINNING
BUT WE MOVING IN A VERY GOOD
PACE AND DIRECTION.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK YOU
ABOUT SOMETHING THAT I KNOW IS
OF GREAT CONCERN TO YOU.
I ASSUME YOU TALKED TO THE
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ABOUT
IT AND THAT IS THE MILITANT,
ISLAMIST GROUP AL-SHABAAB.
THEY HAVE WREAKED DEATH AND
DESTRUCTION IN YOUR COUNTRY FOR
A LONG TIME.
THEY'VE JUST LAST WEEK THEY
MURDERED A LEGISLATOR IN
MOGADISHU, THEY'VE TRIED TO
ASSASSINATE YOU.
YOU'VE SAID THAT YOU BELIEVE
YOUR GOVERNMENT WILL DEFEAT
THEM, BUT HOW LONG WOULD THAT
TAKE?
HOW DIFFICULT A TASK ARE WE
TALKING ABOUT?
>> WITHIN THE NEXT FEW MONTHS
THERE MIGHT NOT BE A TERRITORY
CONTROLLED BY SHABAAB IN
SOMALIA.
BUT THAT'S NOT THE END OF WAR AS
YOU SAID.
THEY MELT DOWN INTO THE SOCIETY
AND THIS HAS SUICIDE BOMBINGS
AND TARGET ASSASSINATIONS WILL
CONTINUE SOMETIME BUT WE
STRONGLY BELIEVE THAT IT WILL
END UP SOON.
>> Woodruff: DO THEY TRY TO
INFILTRATE YOUR INNER CIRCLE?
>> THEY DO TRY EVERYWHERE.
THEY DO TRY TO INFILTRATE INTO
SECURITY INSTITUTIONS.
THE POLITICIAN, POLITICS.
THEY DO TRY TO INFILTRATE INTO
IF NOT THE POLITICIANS THE STAFF
THE POLITICIAN, POLITICS.
THAT WORK WITH THE POLITICIANS.
IF NOT THE POLITICIANS THE STAFF
>> Woodruff: DO YOU FEAR FOR
THAT WORK WITH THE POLITICIANS.
YOUR OWN SAFETY?
>> Woodruff: DO YOU FEAR FOR
I WAS ELECTED ON SEPTEMBER 10TH
YOUR OWN SAFETY?
2012 SEPTEMBER 14TH I WAS
I WAS ELECTED ON SEPTEMBER 10TH
ATTACKED LONG BEFORE I WENT INTO
2012 SEPTEMBER 14TH I WAS
THE STATE HOUSE.
ATTACKED LONG BEFORE I WENT INTO
SO SINCE THEN THEY KEEP TRYING,
THE STATE HOUSE.
THEY'VE ATTEMPTED A NUMBER OF
SO SINCE THEN THEY KEEP TRYING,
TIMES TO GET INTO THE STATE
THEY'VE ATTEMPTED A NUMBER OF
HOUSE BUT THERE WERE A NUMBER OF
TIMES TO GET INTO THE STATE
TIMES WHERE THEY MADE ATTEMPTS
HOUSE BUT THERE WERE A NUMBER OF
IN MY LIFE WHEN I WAS MOVING BUT
TIMES WHERE THEY MADE ATTEMPTS
THE SECURITY FORCES ARE ABORTED
IN MY LIFE WHEN I WAS MOVING BUT
ALL THERE AND I HAVE CONFIDENCE
THE SECURITY FORCES ARE ABORTED
IN MY SECURITY STAFF.
ALL THERE AND I HAVE CONFIDENCE
THEY GIVE ME ENOUGH POSSIBILITY
IN MY SECURITY STAFF.
TO MOVE AROUND IN AND THROUGHOUT
THEY GIVE ME ENOUGH POSSIBILITY
SOMALIA.
TO MOVE AROUND IN AND THROUGHOUT
I'M NOT WORRIED MUCH.
SOMALIA.
YOU BROUGHT UP PIRACY, THIS IS
I'M NOT WORRIED MUCH.
ANOTHER TERRIBLE SCOURGE FOR A
YOU BROUGHT UP PIRACY, THIS IS
WHILE IT WAS AROUND THE HORN OF
ANOTHER TERRIBLE SCOURGE FOR A
AFRICA SHIPS COMING AROUND WERE
WHILE IT WAS AROUND THE HORN OF
FREQUENTLY ATTACKED BY PIRATES
AFRICA SHIPS COMING AROUND WERE
FROM SOMALIA, IT DOES SEEM TO
FREQUENTLY ATTACKED BY PIRATES
HAVE SLOWED DOWN DO YOU HAVE
FROM SOMALIA, IT DOES SEEM TO
THAT BEHIND YOU NOW?
HAVE SLOWED DOWN DO YOU HAVE
>> SO NOW THIS IS PARTLY THIS IS
THAT BEHIND YOU NOW?
ADDRESSED, INTERNATIONAL
>> SO NOW THIS IS PARTLY THIS IS
PARTNERS HAVE MADE A STRONG
ADDRESSED, INTERNATIONAL
MILITARY PRESENCE IN THE SEAS
PARTNERS HAVE MADE A STRONG
AND THEY PUSHED BACK THE PIRATES
MILITARY PRESENCE IN THE SEAS
AND THE SOMALI COMMUNITY LEADERS
AND THEY PUSHED BACK THE PIRATES
AND ELDERS ALSO TAKE A CAMPAIGN
AND THE SOMALI COMMUNITY LEADERS
OF AWARENESS RAISING AMONG THE
AND ELDERS ALSO TAKE A CAMPAIGN
YOUNG PEOPLE TO COMBAT.
OF AWARENESS RAISING AMONG THE
BUT THE ISSUE IS, THE ROOT
YOUNG PEOPLE TO COMBAT.
CAUSES ARE NOT FULLY ADDRESSED,
BUT THE ISSUE IS, THE ROOT
SO THE CHALLENGES STILL EXIST
CAUSES ARE NOT FULLY ADDRESSED,
AND THE GOVERNMENT IS STRUGGLING
SO THE CHALLENGES STILL EXIST
WITH ADDRESSING THOSE ISSUES
AND THE GOVERNMENT IS STRUGGLING
WITH THE SUPPORT OF
WITH ADDRESSING THOSE ISSUES
INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS.
WITH THE SUPPORT OF
>> Woodruff: THERE HAVE BEEN
INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS.
SERIOUS CONCERNS RAISED BY THE
>> Woodruff: THERE HAVE BEEN
US GOVERNMENT AND OTHERS OVER
SERIOUS CONCERNS RAISED BY THE
WHETHER YOUR GOVERNMENT HAS
US GOVERNMENT AND OTHERS OVER
ACHIEVED, SINCE YOU CAME INTO
WHETHER YOUR GOVERNMENT HAS
OFFICE, SUFFICIENT STABILITY,
ACHIEVED, SINCE YOU CAME INTO
TRANSPARENCY, WHETHER CORRUPTION
OFFICE, SUFFICIENT STABILITY,
HAS BEEN DEALT WITH.
TRANSPARENCY, WHETHER CORRUPTION
WHETHER YOU'RE ON TRACK TO HAVE
HAS BEEN DEALT WITH.
A GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL UNITY,
WHETHER YOU'RE ON TRACK TO HAVE
THAT YOU DON'T JUST REPRESENT A
A GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL UNITY,
PART OF THE COUNTRY.
THAT YOU DON'T JUST REPRESENT A
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THOSE WHO ASK
PART OF THE COUNTRY.
THAT?
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THOSE WHO ASK
>> IMAGINE A COUNTRY THAT HAS
THAT?
BEEN WITHOUT A FUNCTIONING STATE
>> IMAGINE A COUNTRY THAT HAS
OVER TWO DECADES, WE HAVE AN
BEEN WITHOUT A FUNCTIONING STATE
OFFICE NOW FOR TWO YEARS.
OVER TWO DECADES, WE HAVE AN
THE PROBLEM THAT EXISTED IN MORE
OFFICE NOW FOR TWO YEARS.
THAN TWO DECADES WON'T BE SOLVED
THE PROBLEM THAT EXISTED IN MORE
OVERNIGHT, BUT WE PUT IN PLACE
THAN TWO DECADES WON'T BE SOLVED
ALL THE NECESSARY FOUNDATIONS TO
OVERNIGHT, BUT WE PUT IN PLACE
HAVE A VERY DEMOCRATIC AND
ALL THE NECESSARY FOUNDATIONS TO
DISTINCT INSTITUTIONS THAT SERVE
HAVE A VERY DEMOCRATIC AND
THE INTERESTS OF ALL SOMALIS.
DISTINCT INSTITUTIONS THAT SERVE
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN 45 YEARS
THE INTERESTS OF ALL SOMALIS.
SOMALIS WILL BE ABLE TO
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN 45 YEARS
EXPERIENCE ELECTIONS IN 2016.
SOMALIS WILL BE ABLE TO
THAT'S THE PLAN FOR THIS
EXPERIENCE ELECTIONS IN 2016.
GOVERNMENT TO MAKE ELECTIONS
THAT'S THE PLAN FOR THIS
HAPPEN IN 2016 AND YOU KNOW WHEN
GOVERNMENT TO MAKE ELECTIONS
THE LAST TIME SOMALIS WENT TO
HAPPEN IN 2016 AND YOU KNOW WHEN
THE POLLS?
THE LAST TIME SOMALIS WENT TO
THAT WAS 1969, 45 YEARS AGO.
THE POLLS?
>> Woodruff: THE NEWS MEDIA, I
THAT WAS 1969, 45 YEARS AGO.
UNDERSTAND FROM READING THAT
>> Woodruff: THE NEWS MEDIA, I
THERE IS ONE AT LEAST ONE
UNDERSTAND FROM READING THAT
LEADING INDEPENDENT GROUP IN
THERE IS ONE AT LEAST ONE
SOMALIA WHICH HAD BEEN HONOREDI.
LEADING INDEPENDENT GROUP IN
THE NAME OF IT WAS SHABELLE
SOMALIA WHICH HAD BEEN HONOREDI.
MEDIA.
THE NAME OF IT WAS SHABELLE
IT WAS ORDERED TO SHUT DOWN,
MEDIA.
CLOSE DOWN ITS OFFICES.
IT WAS ORDERED TO SHUT DOWN,
HOW DO YOU ANSWER THIS?
CLOSE DOWN ITS OFFICES.
AND DOES YOUR COUNTRY HAVE A
HOW DO YOU ANSWER THIS?
FREE MEDIA?
AND DOES YOUR COUNTRY HAVE A
HOW FREE IS THE MEDIA IN
FREE MEDIA?
SOMALIA?
HOW FREE IS THE MEDIA IN
>> THERE ARE NUMBER OF TIMES
SOMALIA?
WHEN SHABAAB INFILTRATION HAS
>> THERE ARE NUMBER OF TIMES
BEEN SUSPECTED IN DIFFERENT
WHEN SHABAAB INFILTRATION HAS
ORGANIZATIONS.
BEEN SUSPECTED IN DIFFERENT
NOT ONLY THE MEDIA, GOVERNMENT
ORGANIZATIONS.
OFFICES, AGENCIES, MINISTRIES.
NOT ONLY THE MEDIA, GOVERNMENT
AND THIS SECURITY PEOPLE THEY GO
OFFICES, AGENCIES, MINISTRIES.
AFTER THAT.
AND THIS SECURITY PEOPLE THEY GO
IF THERE IS A SUSPECT IN A MEDIA
AFTER THAT.
HOUSE, IT'S NOT IMMUNE FROM THAT
IF THERE IS A SUSPECT IN A MEDIA
TYPE OF THING.
HOUSE, IT'S NOT IMMUNE FROM THAT
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT 90% OF THE
TYPE OF THING.
SHABAAB OPERATIONS AND THE
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT 90% OF THE
SHABAAB OPERATIONS ARE ON THE
SHABAAB OPERATIONS AND THE
MEDIA NOT IN THE FIELD.
SHABAAB OPERATIONS ARE ON THE
>> Woodruff: 90%?
MEDIA NOT IN THE FIELD.
THEY'VE BEEN GIVEN SOME OF OUR
>> Woodruff: 90%?
MEDIA, I WON'T SAY ALL OF THEM.
THEY'VE BEEN GIVEN SOME OF OUR
SOME OF OUR MEDIA THEY MIGHT NOT
MEDIA, I WON'T SAY ALL OF THEM.
BE, THE CAPABILITY AND THE
SOME OF OUR MEDIA THEY MIGHT NOT
CAPACITY IS VERY LIMITED TO
BE, THE CAPABILITY AND THE
UNDERSTAND BETWEEN THE
CAPACITY IS VERY LIMITED TO
NEUTRALITY AND WHAT TO BE AND
UNDERSTAND BETWEEN THE
WHAT NOT TO BE.
NEUTRALITY AND WHAT TO BE AND
>> Woodruff: LAST QUESTION.
WHAT NOT TO BE.
WHAT DO YOU WANT AMERICANS TO
>> Woodruff: LAST QUESTION.
KNOW ABOUT SOMALIA THAT THEY MAY
WHAT DO YOU WANT AMERICANS TO
NOT KNOW?
KNOW ABOUT SOMALIA THAT THEY MAY
>> WHAT WE WANT TO KNOW THE
NOT KNOW?
AMERICANS, SOMALIA IS NOT THE
>> WHAT WE WANT TO KNOW THE
SOMALIA OF 1970 AND 1980'S TODAY
AMERICANS, SOMALIA IS NOT THE
AND EVEN 1990'S.
SOMALIA OF 1970 AND 1980'S TODAY
SOMALIA IS A DIFFERENT NOW JUST
AND EVEN 1990'S.
COMING ON THE CORNER OF WE HAVE
SOMALIA IS A DIFFERENT NOW JUST
ON THE ROAD TO DEMOCRATIC
COMING ON THE CORNER OF WE HAVE
INSTITUTIONS TO BE PUT IN PLACE.
ON THE ROAD TO DEMOCRATIC
WE SAY THE UNITED STATES COME TO
INSTITUTIONS TO BE PUT IN PLACE.
SOMALIA, HELP US TO INVEST IN
WE SAY THE UNITED STATES COME TO
THE FUTURE SO THAT NO MORE
SOMALIA, HELP US TO INVEST IN
SHABAAB NO MORE TERRORISTS AND
THE FUTURE SO THAT NO MORE
NO MORE PIRACY IN SOMALIA.
SHABAAB NO MORE TERRORISTS AND
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT MOHAMUD
NO MORE PIRACY IN SOMALIA.
WE THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT MOHAMUD
TALKING WITH US.
WE THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
>> THANK YOU JUDY.
TALKING WITH US.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: NOW TO A POLICE
SHOOTING OF A MISSOURI TEENAGER
THAT SPARKED RACIAL TENSION,
VIOLENCE AND LOOTING IN A ST.
LOUIS SUBURB OVER THE WEEKEND.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: IT WAS ALL SET IN
MOTION SATURDAY WHEN 18-YEAR-OLD
MICHAEL BROWN WAS SHOT
REPEATEDLY BY A POLICE OFFICER
IN THE ST. LOUIS SUBURB OF
FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
BROWN WAS UNARMED AND WITNESSES
MAINTAINED HE WAS AN INNOCENT
VICTIM.
>> HE WAS RUNNING AND THEN HE
TURNED AROUND AND PUT HIS ARMS
UP.
HE JUST STOPPED, PUT HIS HANDS
UP AFTER HE HAD GOTTEN SHOT
REPEATEDLY.
>> Reporter: THE CHIEF OF POLICE
OF ST. LOUIS COUNTY, WHO'S
LEADING THE INVESTIGATION, SAID
THE INCIDENT BEGAN WITH A
SCUFFLE.
>> IT IS OUR UNDERSTANDING AT
THIS POINT IN THE INVESTIGATION
THAT WITHIN THE POLICE CAR THERE
WAS A STRUGGLE OVER THE
OFFICER'S WEAPON.
THERE WAS AT LEAST ONE SHOT
FIRED WITHIN THE CAR.
>> Reporter: THE OFFICER WAS
PLACED ON ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE.
HIS IDENTITY AND RACE WERE NOT
RELEASED.
BUT THE KILLING SPARKED OUTRAGE
AND PROTESTS YESTERDAY
AFTERNOON.
AND DEMONSTRATIONS CONTINUED
INTO THE NIGHT.
THEN CAME THE CANDLELIGHT VIGIL
THAT BEGAN PEACEFULLY, BUT
TURNED VIOLENT.
THE MAYOR SAID A SMALL GROUP
CAUSED THE TROUBLE.
32 PEOPLE WERE ARRESTED.
CHARLIE DOOLEY IS THE COUNTY'S
EXECUTIVE.
>> WE'RE ON TOP OF THIS
SITUATION.
WE UNDERSTAND THEIR FRUSTRATION.
WE UNDERSTAND THEIR CONCERN.
WE ARE ASKING ALL OF THE PUBLIC
BE CALM, BE PATIENT AND BE
PRAYERFUL.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER VIGIL AND
PROTEST MARCH WERE HELD TODAY.
>> I JUST WISH I COULD HAVE
HELPED HIM.
HE DID NOT DESERVE IT.
>> Reporter: AND, THE F.B.I.
CONFIRMED IT IS REVIEWING THE
SHOOTING FOR POSSIBLE CIVIL
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS.
IT'S THE LATEST SUCH CASE SINCE
THE FATAL SHOOTING OF TRAYVON
MARTIN IN 2012 BY A NEIGHBORHOOD
WATCH MEMBER IN FLORIDA.
LAST MONTH, IN NEW YORK CITY,
ANOTHER BLACK MAN, ERIC GARNER,
DIED AFTER BEING PUT IN A
CHOKEHOLD BY POLICE, ACCORDING
TO A MEDICAL EXAMINER.
AND IN LOS ANGELES, ONLOOKERS
VIDEOTAPED MARLENE PINNOCK AS
SHE WAS BEATEN BY A CALIFORNIA
HIGHWAY PATROL OFFICER.
WE GET REACTION NOW, FROM
SHERRILYN IFILL, PRESIDENT OF
THE NAACP'S LEGAL DEFENSE FUND.
AND GREG MEYER, A FORMER CAPTAIN
FOR THE LOS ANGELES POLICE
DEPARTMENT, WHO'S WRITTEN ON AND
TESTIFIED IN USE-OF-FORCE CASES
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
LET ME START WITH YOU, IT'S
STILL EARLY IN THIS
INVESTIGATION.
WHAT DOW THINK ARE THE MOST
IMPORTANT FACTS TO LEARN AND
WHO IS BEST TO DETERMINE
THEM?
>> WELL, I THINK WOULD BE
TERRIFIC IF WE LEARNED THE
NAME OF THE OFFICER AND
SOMETHING ABOUT HIS RECORD
ON THE FORCE.
OBVIOUSLY THE EYE WITNESS
ACCOUNTS AND THEY ARE
CONFLICTING EYE WITNESS
ACCOUNTS BETWEEN RESIDENTS
OF THE COMMUNITY WHO SAY
THEY OBSERVED WHAT HAPPENED,
AND WHAT WE ARE HEARING FROM
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
WE DON'T KNOW THE NAME OF
THE OFFICER OR ANYTHING
ABOUT HIM.
I THINK WE'RE ENTITLED TO
KNOW THAT.
HE IS A PUBLIC SERVANT.
AT HAPPENED DURING THATNOW
ENCOUNTER BETWEEN MIKE WOOD
AND THE POLICE.
FRANKLY, THE ACCOUNT THAT
WE'VE HEARD ABOUT THIS
STRUGGLE FOR THE GUN IS ALL
TOO FAMILIAR.
AND FRANKLY T RAISES A LOT
OF QUESTIONS.
AND SO WE NEED AN
INVESTIGATION TO HAPPEN.
I'M PLEASED THAT THE FBI HAS
JOINED, NOT TAKEN OVER, IT'S
A CONCURRENT INVESTIGATION
BUT WE NEED AN INVESTIGATION
TO HAPPEN QUICKLY.
AND WE NEED ANSWERS QUICKLY.
WE ARE STILL WAITING FOR
CHARGE NOTICE ERIC GARNER
CASE.
AND I THINK THESE ARE THE
KINDS OF THINGS THAT ARE
CREATING FRUSTRATION IN
COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
>> LET ME ASK GREG MY FRERE
A POLICE PERSPECTIVE WHEN
YOU HAVE THESE KINDS OF
QUESTIONS OVER USE OF DEADLY
FORCE, WHAT HAS TO COME OUT?
WHAT ARE THE IMPORTANT FACTS
THAT YOU WANT TO SEE BROUGHT
OUT?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, THE
INVESTIGATIONS TEND NOT TO
HAPPEN QUICKLY.
THEY TEND TO BE VERY
THOROUGH AND THEY TAKE SOME
TIME.
WHAT HAS TO HAPPEN HERE IS A
REALIZATION THAT THIS
OFFICER WAS IN THIS
SITUATION.
YOU'RE GOING TO GET THAT
OFFICER'S STATEMENT.
YOU'RE GOING TO GET WITNESS
STATEMENTS.
I'M NOT AWARE THAT THERE IS
ANY VIDEO OR AUDIO EVIDENCE
IN THIS CASE.
IF THERE IS, ALL OF THAT
WOULD BE PART OF WHAT'S
ANALYZED TOO.
ULTIMATELY THE SYSTEM WILL
DECIDE THROUGH POLICY,
REVIEW, TRAINING REVIEW AND
LEGAL REVIEW, WAS THIS
OFFICER'S ACTIONS REASONABLE
UNDER THE CONSTITUTION OF
THE UNITED STATES.
WE'RE TO THE GOING TO KNOW
FOR SOME TIME HOW TO
EVALUATE THAT AND I WOULD
JUST ADD BRIEFLY, ABOUT 10%
OF ALL OFFICERS THAT ARE
MURDERED IN THIS COUNTRY
EACH YEAR IN MODERN TIMES
ARE MURDERED WITH THEIR OWN
HANDGUN.
THAT'S DOWN FROM 20% A
GENERATION AGO.
SO I THINK WE'RE GETTING
BETTER AT RETAINING OUR
WEAPONS.
BUT THE STRUGGLE OVER THE
GUN IS A BIG QUESTION IN
THIS CASE.
IT WILL HAVE TO BE ANSWERED.
>> SHERRILYN IFILL, YOU CAN
RESPOND TO THAT AND I WANT
YOU TO PICK UP ON WHERE YOU
ENDED.
WE SAW THE STRONG RESPONSE
IN THE COMMUNITY AND
NATIONWIDE.
TELL US WHERE THAT'S COMING
FROM.
>> WELL, I THINK THERE IS A
LOCAL RESPONSE THAT HAS TO
DO WITH THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN
COMMUNITY AND THE
COBL FERGUSON
WHICH I THINK BEARS SOME
INVESTIGATION AS WELL.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE
STATISTICS INVOLVING ARRESTS
AND SO FORTH IN THAT TOWN BY
THEIR POLICE DEPARTMENT,
AFRICAN-AMERICANS ARE THE
SUBJECT OF 90% OF THE STOPS,
WHETHER IN VEHICLES, WHETHER
ON THE STREET, WHETHER ON
LOCAL ROADS, WHETHER ON THE
HIGHWAY.
AND INTERESTINGLY, HOWEVER,
THE GREATEST AMOUNT
CONTRABAND THAT'S FOUND
HAPPENS WITH STOPS OF WHITE
RESIDENTS.
SO I THINK THERE MAY BE A
LOCAL STORY THAT NEEDS TO
COME OUT.
BUT THERE'S ALSO A NATIONAL
STORY.
YOU JUST ELUDED TO SEVERAL
OF THE INCIDENTS.
I TALKED ABOUT ERIC GARNER.
WE KNOW THAT A MAN WAS
KILLED IN THE WAL-MART IN
OHIO LAST WEEK BY POLICE
OFFICERS, WHO WAS UNARMED.
WE SAW THE DISGUSTING VIDEO
OF A WOMAN BEING BRUTALLY
BEATEN ON A HIGHWAY BY A
CALIFORNIA POLICE OFFICER.
AND THAT'S JUST IN THE LAST
FEW MONTHS.
THESE INCIDENT GOES BACK
DECADES.
WE COULD RATTLE OFF NAMES
AND USE UP THE ENTIRE
NEWSHOUR DOING SOPH CASES OF
POLICE INVOLVED ATTACKS,
SHOOTINGS, ASSAULTS ON
NS
AND SO I THINK THE LARGER
ISSUE IS ABOUT THE WAY IN
WHICH THE POLICE FORCE IN
CITIES ALL OVER THIS COUNTRY
ENGAGE WITH UNARMED,
NONVIOLENT
AFRICAN-AMERICANS.
THE PERCEPTION OF
CRIMINALITY WHEN
AFRICAN-AMERICANS ARE SEEN
AND THE OFTEN VIOLENT AN
DISPROPORTIONATELY VIOLENT
RESPONSE OF POLICE OFFICERS
WHO ARE TRAINED AND SHOULD
BE TRAINED PUBLIC SERVANTS.
TRAINED IN DIFFUSING
SITUATIONS.
THE GUN SHOULD BE THE LAST
RESORT.
AND TOO OFTEN WE SEE IT AS
THE FIRST RESORT.
>> LET ME ASK GREG MYER, DO
YOU SENSE THE POLICE FORCES
AROUND THE COUNTRY SEE CASES
LIKE THIS AS PART OF A
SYSTEMIC PROBLEM AND TO WHAT
EXTENT ARE THEY RESPONDING
TO IT, AND R TO
RESPOND?
>> WELL, I THINK EVERY
INCIDENT IS DIFFERENT
WHETHER IT'S AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN PERSON
INVOLVED OR NOT.
THERE IS MORE AND MORE
TRAINING GOING ON, AND MORE
AND MORE TRAINING PROGRAMS
BEING DEVELOPED ON, FOR HOW TO E
MENTALLY ILL PEOPLE.
THERE'S MORE AND MORE COURT
OVERSIGHT.
I KNOW IN THE 9th CIRCUIT IN
THE WESTERN UNITED STATES
THE FEDERAL 9th CIRCUIT
COURT OF APPEALS HAS ISSUED
AT LEAST ONE OPINION WHERE
THEY'RE LOOKING NOT JUST AT
THE MOMENT THAT FORCE WAS
USED AS WAS WHAT WAS
TRADITIONALLY LOOKED AT.
BUT ALSO WHAT'S LEADING UP
TO IT.
WHAT TACTICS ARE THE
OFFICERS ENGAGING IN BEFORE
THEY GO IN AND USE FORCE ON
SOMEONE.
SO IT'S AN EVOLVING ISSUE.
WE'RE GOING TO SEE MORE AND
MORE VIDEOS.
I MEAN POLICE OFFICERS HAVE
VIDEOS ON THEIR BODIES IN
MANY CITIES.
NOW THAT'S ONLY GOING TO
INCREASE IN ADDITION TO ALL
THE OTHER VIDEOS THAT WE
KNOW ARE OUT THERE.
>> JUST VERY BRIEFLY IN THE
LAST MINUTE, MR. MYER, DO
YOU SENSE, THOUGH T THAT
POLICE FORCES UNDERSTAND THE
AND THEIR THIS QUICKLY
AROUSES IN COMMUNITIES
AROUND THE COUNTRY?
>> OH, SURE, ESPECIALLY IN
THE BIG PLACES, NEW YORK,
LOS ANGELES, OTHER BIG
CITIES.
THESE THINGS HAPPEN WITH
MORE FREQUENCY THAN THEY DO
IN THE SMALLER JURISDICTIONS
FOR SURE.
SO THE POLICE OFFICERS GET
SOME EXPERIENCE ONE STANDING
THE FRUSTRATION THAT'S OUT
THERE THE ANGER THAT'S OUT
THERE.
VIDEOS, ESPECIALLY, DRIVE
PEOPLE EMOTIONALLY.
AND WE'RE A NATION OF LAW,
NOT EMOTION.
>> AND SHERRILYN IFILL N 20
SECONDS PLEASE, A LAST WORD.
>> DEAD CHILDREN ACTUALLY
DRIVE PEOPLE EMOTIONALLY
EVEN MORE THAN VIDEOS.
PEOPLE WHO ARE UNARMED,
WATCHING A MAN BE CHOKED TO
DEATH ON NATIONWIDE
TELEVISION WHO CLEARLY IS
UNARMED.
THOSE THINGS ACTUALLY AROUSE,
AND APPROPRIATELY AROUSE
EMOTION AND THEY SHOULDN'T
AROUSE THE EMOTION JUST OF
AFRICAN-AMERICANS BUT EVERY
AMERICAN, WE ARE A NATION OF
LAWS AND WE WANT POLICE
OFFICERS TO BE ACCOUNTABLE
TO THE LAW JUST AS THE
CITIZENRY SHOULD BE AS WELL.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> SHERRILYN IFILL AND GREG
MEYER, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL BE BACK WITH
A LOOK AT MORE TOUGH HEADLINES
FOR THE NEWSPAPER INDUSTRY.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, THE LATEST
TURN IN THE EVOLVING BUSINESS OF
NEWSPAPERS.
AFTER YEARS OF BEING ONE PART OF
THE MEDIA'S BROADER STRATEGY TO
GROW AND DIVERSIFY COMPANIES NOW
ARE SHEDDING PRINT ALTOGETHER.
GANNETT, WHICH OWNS USA TODAY
AND MANY OTHER PAPERS, BECAME
THE LATEST TO SPIN OFF ITS PRINT
OPERATIONS LAST WEEK.
THAT, A DAY AFTER THE TRIBUNE
COMPANY MADE A SIMILAR MOVE.
AND DAYS AFTER E.W. SCRIPPS AND
JOURNAL COMMUNICATIONS ANNOUNCED
SIMILAR PLANS AS PART OF A
MERGER.
KEN DOCTOR COVERS MEDIA FOR HIS
WEBSITE "NEWSONOMICS" AND COLUMN
FOR THE NIEMAN JOURNALISM LAB.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
I HAVE JUST NAMED SOME OF
THE SPIN-OFFS THAT HAVE
HAPPENED.
WHY IS THIS HAPPENING NOW?
>> WELL, IT'S FINANCIAL.
IT'S WALL STREET.
IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT'S
HAPPENED WITH THE NEWSPAPER
INDUSTRY, IT'S BEEN REALLY A
LONG DISSENT.
PROFITS ARE DOWN, WORKFORCES
ARE DOWN,-- PRODUCTS ARE
THINNER.
AND THE BROADCAST INDUSTRY
IS MUCH HEALTHIER.
SO ON WALL STREET YOU WANT
THE HEALTHY BUSINESS, YOU
DON'T WANT THE DISTRESSED
BUSINESS, ESPECIALLY THE
NEWSPAPER BUSINESS IS BEING
SEQUESTERED OR SEPARATED OUT
FROM THESE BETTER BROADCAST
ASSETS.
>> SO THIS IDEA OF HAVING
MULTIPLE PLATFORMS WITH
TELEVISION, WITH PRINT AND
DIGITAL, THAT'S JUST GONE
GOOD-BYE?
>> IT IS KIND OF IRONIC NOW.
BECAUSE WE HEARD FROM ITS
DIVERSIFIED COMPANIES THAT
SYNERGY WAS VERY IMPORTANT.
AND OF COURSE ON OUR SMART
PHONES AND TABLETS WE EXPECT
VIDEO FROM NEWSPAPER
COMPANIES AND STORIES FROM
BROADCAST COMPANIES.
AND ONE IDEA HERE WAS
MULTIPLATFORM, MULTIDEVICE.
BUT NOW THESE COMPANIES ARE
SEPARATE.
SO IMPORTANTLY, THIS IS A
FINANCIAL MOVE.
IT'S NOT A STRATEGIC ONE.
AND MAY NOT REALLY BE IN THE
BEST INTERESTS OF THE
COMMUNITIES THEY SERVE OR
THEIR LEADERS.
>> I WANTED TO ASK YOU ABOUT
THAT IN A MINUTE.
BUT TO PIN DOWN THE
FINANCIAL PIECE, WHAT IS IT
THAT WALL STREET IS LOOKING
FOR FROM THESE COMPANIES.
>> SO, IF YOU LOOK AT
GANNETT, FOR INSTANCE,
GANNETT IS THE LARGEST U.S.
NEWSPAPER COMPANY.
ONLY 30% OF ALL ITS ANNUAL
REVENUES COME FROM BROADCAST,
BUT 60% OF ITS PROFITS COME
FROM BROADCAST.
SO THOSE LINES ARE
DIVERGING.
THE PRINT OPERATIONS KEEP ON
LOSING MONEY YEAR-OVER-YEAR,
NO GROWTH FOR GANNETT OR THE
REST OF THE COMPANIES IN
ESSENTIALLY 7 YEARS.
SO THE IDEA IS MOVE THOSE
ASSETS OUT OF THE WAY AS
RUPERT MURDOCH DID WITH NEWS
CORP. IN THE MIDDLE OF LAST
SUMMER, AND IT WORKS.
WALL STREET VALUES THE TWO
SEPARATE COMPANIES MORE
HIGHLY THAN THE ONE COMPANY
PUT TOGETHER WITH NEWSPAPER
AND BROADCAST ASSETS.
>> AND ONE OF THE DIVISIONS
HERE IS THE DIVISION BETWEEN
PUBLICLY HELD MEDIA
COMPANIES AND THOSE THAT ARE
PRIVATELY HELD LIKE JEFF
BEZOS OF AMAZON BUYING "THE
WASHINGTON POST".
THE PRIVATE MODEL SEEMS TO
BE DOING BETTER.
>> WELL, A LOT OF THIS
IS-- "THE WASHINGTON POST,"
JOHN HENREY IN BOSTON,
ANOTHER ONE IN MINNEAPOLIS
THEY ARE ALL A-YEAR-OLD,
MANY OF THESE SPLITS ARE
A-YEAR-OLD SO BOTH THINGS
ARE HAPPENING AT THE SAME
TIME.
I DO THINK THE PRIVATE MODEL
IS GOING TO BE BETTER
BECAUSE THESE COMPANIES,
THESE NEWSPAPER COMPANIES
STILL HAVE ANOTHER GOOD
THREE TO FIVE YEARS TO
TRANSITION.
AND BEING IN THE PUBLIC
MARKETS AS A STAND ALONE
PUBLIC COMPANY,
QUARTER-BY-QUARTER RESULTS
IS VERY TOUGH.
THEY MAY NEED TO KEEP ON
CUTTING TO MAINTAIN EVEN
SMALL PROFITS FOR THEIR
SHAREHOLDERS.
>> SO CUTTING HOW MANY.
HOW MANY REPORTERS ARE WE
TALKING ABOUT BEING CUT?
WHAT IS THIS DOING TO THE
JOURNALISM IN THE UNITED
STATES?
>> IT HAS BEEN THINNING FOR
ALMOST A DECADE NOW.
SO WE'VE HAD 18,000 DAILY
JOURNALISTS LOSE THEIR JOBS,
THAT'S 30% OF ALL THE
JOURNALISTS WORKING, ABOUT
1400 DAILY NEWSPAPERS.
AND MOST OF THEM ARE LOCAL
IN OUR COUNTRY.
AND WE SEE THIS.
A LOT OF THE LOSSES ARE
VETERAN REPORTERS WHO REALLY
HAVE A DEEPER KNOWLEDGE OF
THEIR COMMUNITIES BUT
THEY'RE MORE EXPICHBS.
SO NOT ONLY ARE JOBS BEING
CUT BUT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF YEARS OF
EXPERIENCE IS BEING LOST.
IT'S HARD TO PINPOINT
BECAUSE WE DON'T KNOW WHAT
WE DON'T KNOW.
BUT IT'S UNMISTAKABLE ACROSS
THE UNITED STATES.
>> AND CONSUMERS OF NEWS
AREN'T NOTICING, HOW DO YOU
SEE THAT?
ARE THEY COMMENTING ON THIS?
ARE THEY SPEAKING UP ABOUT
IT?
>> THEY ARE SEEING WE'RE
SEEING SOME COMMENTING.
NOT THAT MUCH BECAUSE IT'S A
SLOW PHENOMENON.
AND AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
THERE'S REALLY A GREAT NO
WERING.
AND YOU CAN MAKE THE CASE WE
HAVE MORE THAN WE EVER HAD.
BUT WE'RE A BIG COUNTRY,
3,000 MILES WIDE AND WE NEED
THESE LOCAL NEWSPAPERS
PEOPLE BECAUSE THEY GENERATE
MOST OF THE NEWS.
THE BRIGHTEST SPOT HAS BEEN
READER REVENUE.
ALL THESE-- WALLS WE TALK
ABOUT AND HALF THE NEWSPAPERS
ALL HAVE THEM.
THE PROBLEM IS GOING FORWARD
HOW MUCH PEOPLE ARE WILLING
TO PAY FOR A PRODUCT THAT
KEEPS GETTING SMALLER AND IS
PUT OUT BY THE SMALLER
WORKFORCE.
THAT'S THE KEY PROBLEM GOING
FORWARD IN THE 2015.
>> SO JUST QUICKLY YOU SEE
THAT AS THE WAY THEY
SURVIVE?
>> THAT IS THE KEY ONE I SAY,
YOU LOOK AT THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" NOW, 62% OF ITS
REVENUE COMES FROM READERS.
THE OTHER COMPANIES, IT'S
ABOUT 30 TO 40%.
BUT READERS ARE GOING TO
HAVE TO PAY MORE BUT OF
COURSE WE WANT A BETTER
PRODUCT.
THERE ARE OTHER THINGS
THEY'RE DOING IN TERMS OF
THE ADVERTISING END,
DIVERSIFYING THEIR
BUSINESSES AND THESE WILL
HELP BUT THEY WILL TAKE
THREE TO FIVE YEARS TO
REALLY MAKE A DIFFERENCE IN
THE MARKETPLACE.
>> AND RO KEN DOCTOR
NEWSONOMICS, WE THANK YOU.
>> QUITE WELL COME
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
AN IRAQI SHIITE LEADER WAS
TAPPED TO TRY TO FORM A NEW
GOVERNMENT.
PRESIDENT OBAMA OFFERED U.S.
SUPPORT, BUT THE INCUMBENT PRIME
MINISTER, NOURI AL-MALIKI,
INSISTED THE EFFORT IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THE LIBERIAN GOVERNMENT
ANNOUNCED TONIGHT THE U.S. WILL
PROVIDE DOSES OF AN EXPERIMENTAL
DRUG TO FIGHT THE EBOLA OUTBREAK
THERE.
AND ISRAELI AND PALESTINIAN
NEGOTIATORS RESUMED INDIRECT
TALKS IN EGYPT, AS A NEW
72-HOUR CEASE-FIRE BEGAN.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
TUESDAY, THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION ON THE BEST AND
MOST ETHICAL WAY TO COMBAT THE
EBOLA OUTBREAK.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.